Document useRegisterMutationMiddleware (#9031)
marmelab/react-admin: docs/useRegisterMutationMiddleware.md

---
layout: default
title: "useRegisterMutationMiddleware"
---

# `useRegisterMutationMiddleware`

> This hook allows to register a mutation middleware function.

Reviewer: This isn't really helping if you don't know what a middleware function is...

Author: Same

> Middleware functions allow you to hook into a mutation process to perform various actions before or after the main mutation action (create or update). They allow similar use cases as the [`withLifeCycleCallbacks`](./withLifecycleCallbacks.md) except they are declared at the component level.

Reviewer: You should also explain why one may need it: to transform data before saving it, to update / delete related data, etc

> **Tip** This hook will unregister the middleware function in its cleanup phase (for instance when the component that called it is unmounted).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Tip**: This hook will unregister the middleware function in its cleanup phase (for instance when the component that called it unmounts).
```

> ## Usage

Reviewer: You should explain the notion of middleware and `next` function before. This example isn't self-explanatory.

Author: I added a paragraph about them below

import get from 'lodash/get';
import set from 'lodash/set';

const handleImageUpload = (
    source: string
): Middleware<UseCreateResult[0]> => async (
    resource,
    params,
    options,
    next
) => {
    const images = get(params?.data, source);

    if (Array.isArray(images)) {
        const newImages = await Promise.all(
            images.map(async image => {
                const b64 = await convertFileToBase64(image);
                return {
                    title: image.title,
                    src: b64,
                };
            })
        );
        const newData = set({ ...params?.data }, source, newImages);

        next(
            resource,
            {
                ...params,
                data: newData,
            },
            options
        );
        return;
    }

    const b64 = await convertFileToBase64(images);
    const newData = set({ ...params?.data }, source, {
        title: images.title,
        src: b64,
    });

    next(
        resource,
        {
            ...params,
            data: newData,
        },
        options
    );
};

> const convertFileToBase64 = file =>

Reviewer: Using the File type would make the signature more explicit.

Author: That's not always a `File`

    new Promise((resolve, reject) => {
        // If the file src is a blob url, it must be converted to b64.
        if (file.src.startsWith('blob:')) {
            const reader = new FileReader();
            reader.onload = () => resolve(reader.result);
            reader.onerror = reject;

            reader.readAsDataURL(file.rawFile);
        } else {
            resolve(file.src);
        }
    });

> const MyImageInput = (props: Omit<ImageInputProps, 'children'>) => {

Reviewer: Why omit the children instead of copying them? it's not necessary for this example.

>     const middleware = useCallback(handleImageUpload(props.source), [

Reviewer: Is the useCallback compulsory. If so, you should document it.

Author: Added

        props.source,
    ]);

    useRegisterMutationMiddleware(middleware);

    return (
        <ImageInput {...props}>
            <ImageField source="src" title="title" />
        </ImageInput>
    );
};

> ```

Author: Added

- transforming the data passed to the main mutation,
- updating the mutation parameters before it is called,
- creating, updating or deleting related data,
- adding performances logs,
- etc.

Middleware functions have access to the same parameters as the underlying mutation (`create` or `update`), and to a `next` function to call the next function in the mutation lifecycle.

`useRegisterMutationMiddleware` allows to register a mutation middleware function for the current form.

## Usage

Define a middleware function, then use the hook to register it. 

For example, a middleware for the create mutation looks like the following:

```tsx
import * as React from 'react';
import {
    useRegisterMutationMiddleware,
    CreateParams,
    MutateOptions,
    CreateMutationFunction
} from 'react-admin';

const MyComponent = () => {

>     const createMiddleware = (
>         resource: string,
>         params: CreateParams,
>         options: MutateOptions,
>         next: CreateMutationFunction
>     ) => {
>         // Do something before the mutation
> 
>         // Call the next middleware
>         next(resource, params, options);
> 
>         // Do something after the mutation
>     }

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't this be written as an async function? :thinking: 

```suggestion
    const createMiddleware = async (
        resource: string,
        params: CreateParams,
        options: MutateOptions,
        next: CreateMutationFunction
    ) => {
        // Do something before the mutation

        // Call the next middleware
        await next(resource, params, options);

        // Do something after the mutation
    }
```

Author: indeed

    const memoizedMiddleWare = React.useCallback(createMiddleware, []);
    useRegisterMutationMiddleware(memoizedMiddleWare);
    // ...
}
```

Then, render that component as a descendent of the page controller component (`<Create>` or `<Edit>`).

React-admin will wrap each call to the `dataProvider.create()` mutation with the `createMiddleware` function as long as the `MyComponent` component is mounted.

`useRegisterMutationMiddleware` unregisters the middleware function when the component unmounts. For this to work correctly, you must provide a stable reference to the function by wrapping it in a `useCallback` hook for instance.

## Params

`useRegisterMutationMiddleware` expects a single parameter: a middleware function.

A middleware function must have the following signature:

```jsx
const middlware = (resource, params, options, next) => {
    // Do something before the mutation

    // Call the next middleware
    next(resource, params, options);

    // Do something after the mutation

> }

Reviewer 2: same
